16S metagenomics Nanopore training (#2137)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/metagenomics/tutorials/nanopore-16S-metagenomics/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

> title: 16s microbial analysis with nanopore data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 16S Microbial analysis with nanopore data
```

- How can we analyse the health status of the soil?
- How do plants modify the composition of microbial communities?
objectives:
- Use nanopore data for studying soil metagenomics
- Analyze and preprocess nanopore reads
- Use Kraken2 to assign a taxonomic labels
time_estimation: 2H
key_points:
- We learned to use nanopore data for analyzing the health status of the soil
- We preprocessed nanopore sequences in order to improve their quality
contributors:
- gallardoalba

---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

<!-- This is a comment. -->

__Healthy soils__ are an essential element in maintaining the planet’s ecological balance. That is why their protection must be considered a priority in order to guarantee the well-being of humanity. The alteration of microbial populations often precedes changes in the physical and chemical properties of soils, so monitoring their condition can serve to predict their future evolution, allowing to develop stategies to __mitigate ecosystem damage__. Some of the species considered as __key bioindicators__ of soil quality are those belonging to the genera _Rhizobium_ and _Nitrosomonas_, because they are very sensitive to agro-industrial compounds.

> ![Bacterial bioindicators](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/bioindicators.jpg "Relationship between bacterial community composition and soil parameters {% cite Hermans2016 %}.")

Author: @beatrizserrano I included some details about it.

>    - Paste the Zenodo links and press <kbd>Start</kbd> and <kbd>Build</kbd>
>    
>     ```
>     https://zenodo.org/record/4274812/files/bulk_bottom.fastq.gz
>     https://zenodo.org/record/4274812/files/bulk_top.fastq.gz
>     https://zenodo.org/record/4274812/files/rhizosphere_bottom.fastq.gz
>     https://zenodo.org/record/4274812/files/rhizosphere_top.fastq.gz
>     ```
>     - Assign a name to the new collection: `soil collection`
>
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
>
> 
{: .hands_on}

# Assess datasets quality

Before starting to work on our datasets, it is necessary to assess their quality. This is an essential step if we aim to obtain a __meaningful downstream analysis__.

> ### {% icon details %} FASTQ sequence quality format
>
> FASTQ format is a text-based format for storing both a biological sequence and its corresponding quality scores. Both the sequence letter and the quality score are encoded with a single ASCII character for brevity. You can find more info in the [Wikipedia article](FASTQ format).
>
{: .details}

## Quality control using FastQC and MultiQC

> __FastQC__ is one of the most widely used tools to __check the quality__ of the samples generated by High Throughput Sequencing (HTS) technologies. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %} is one of the most widely used tools to __check the quality__ of the samples generated by High Throughput Sequencing (HTS) technologies. 
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Quality check
>
> 1. {% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `soil collection` 
>
> 2. Rename the outputs as `FastQC unprocessed: Raw` and `FastQC unprocessed: Web` 
> 3. {% tool [MultiQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multiqc/multiqc/1.8+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - In *"Results"*:
>      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `FastQC`
>      - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*:
>
>		- `FastQC unprocessed: Raw`
> 4. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the generated HTML file
> 
>
{: .hands_on}

> __FastQC__ provides information on various parameters, such as the range of quality values across all bases at each position. __MultiQC__ allows summarizing the output of different outputs from __FastQC__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %} provides information on various parameters, such as the range of quality values across all bases at each position. {% tool [MultiQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multiqc/multiqc/1.8+galaxy1) %} allows summarizing the output of different outputs from {% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %}.
```

> ![FastQC plots length](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/fastqc_sequence_length_distribution_plot.png "Sequence length distribution")

Reviewer: Are the two samples supposed to have different colors in the plot, or why are there two yellow lines?

Author: @willemdek11 Indeed there are four samples. The color coding of the plot denotes the quality scores; green is considered high, yellow medium, and red low quality score.

In the first place, we are going to analyse the sequence length distribution of the different datasets.

> ### {% icon question %} Question
>

> > 1. Can you explain the sequence length distribution plot?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. Can you explain the sequence length distribution plot? (Figure 3)
```

>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > The main peak, around 1700 bp, corresponds approximately to the length of the gene coding for 16S rRNA. There is also a secondary peak around 200 bp, which may be due to __truncated amplifications__, or as a result of __non-specific hybridization of primers__ used for PCR.
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

![FastQC plots quality](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/fastqc_per_base_sequence_quality_plot.png "Per base sequence quality")

> If we examine figure 3, we can see that up to 3000 bp the quality of our sequencing data is around a __Phred score__ of 12, which is a relatively low value compared to other sequencing technologies. This is explained because Nanopore reads poses __high error rates in the basecalled reads__ (10% as compared to 1% for Illumina). However, Nanopore sequencing generates __very long reads__ (in theory only limited by the mechanisms of extraction of the genetic material), enabling the sequencing of the complete 16S rRNA gene, which makes it possible to identify bacterial taxa at higher resolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we examine figure 4, we can see that up to 3000 bp the quality of our sequencing data is around a __Phred score__ of 12, which is a relatively low value compared to other sequencing technologies. This is explained because Nanopore reads poses __high error rates in the basecalled reads__ (10% as compared to 1% for Illumina). However, Nanopore sequencing generates __very long reads__ (in theory only limited by the mechanisms of extraction of the genetic material), enabling the sequencing of the complete 16S rRNA gene, which makes it possible to identify bacterial taxa at higher resolution.
```

![FasTQC plots CG](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/fastqc_per_sequence_gc_content_plot.png "Per sequence GC content")

> Let's have a look at figure 4, which shows the content of the GC by sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's have a look at figure 5, which shows the content of the GC by sequence.
```

>
> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> What can cause GC content to show a bimodal peak?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > There are several possible causes for the presence of twin peaks in the GC content. One possible explanation is the presence of adapters in the sequence. Another possible cause is some kind of contamination, such as chimeras.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

> ### {% icon comment %} Comments
> For more information on the topic of quality control, please see our training materials [here](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/quality-control/tutorial.html).
{: .comment}

# Improve the dataset quality

> In order to improve the quality of our data, we will use two tools presented above, __porechop__ and __fastp__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to improve the quality of our data, we will use two tools presented above, {% tool [Porechop](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/porechop/porechop/0.2.3) %} and {% tool [fastp](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/fastp/fastp/0.20.1+galaxy0) %}.
```

## Adapter and chimera removal with porechop

> Nanopore sequencing technology requires to ligate adapters to both ends of genomic material to facilitate the strand capture and loading of a processive enzyme at the 5'end, boosting the effectiveness of the sequencing process. Adapter sequences should be removed because they __can interfere with aligment of reads__ to 16S rRNA gene reference database, for which we will use the __porechop__ tool ({% cite rrwick2017 %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nanopore sequencing technology requires to ligate adapters to both ends of genomic material to facilitate the strand capture and loading of a processive enzyme at the 5'end, boosting the effectiveness of the sequencing process. Adapter sequences should be removed because they __can interfere with aligment of reads__ to 16S rRNA gene reference database, for which we will use the {% tool [Porechop](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/porechop/porechop/0.2.3) %} tool ({% cite rrwick2017 %}).
```

> ### {% icon comment %} Comment
> If you are interested in Nanopore sequecing technology, you can find more information in {% cite Jain2016 %}.
> 
{: .comment}

> On the other hand, __chimeric sequences__ are considered a contaminant and should be removed because they can result in artificial inflation of the microbial diversity. With __Porechop__ you can eliminate them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, __chimeric sequences__ are considered a contaminant and should be removed because they can result in artificial inflation of the microbial diversity. With {% tool [Porechop](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/porechop/porechop/0.2.3) %} you can eliminate them. 
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Remove adapters with porechop
>
> 1. {% tool [Porechop](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/porechop/porechop/0.2.3) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Input FASTA/FASTQ"*: {% icon param-collection %} `soil collection`
>    - *"Output format for the reads"*: `fastq`
> 2. Rename the output as `soil collection trimmed`
>
{: .hands_on}

## Filter sequences with fastp

> To increase the specificity of the analysis, we will select the reads with lengths between 1000 bp and 2000 bp, which are more informative from a taxonomic point of view, because they include both preserved and hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene. In addition, sequences will be filtered on a minimum average read quality score of 9, according to the recommendations from {% cite Nygaard2020 %}. This stage will be carried out through the use of __fastp__ ({% cite Chen_2018 %}), an open-source tool designed to process FASTQ files.

Reviewer: You're also filtering just because you would expect the sequenced 16s rRNA gene has that length right. So you can assume that sequences shorter or longer are wrong in the first place?

```suggestion
To increase the specificity of the analysis, we will select the reads with lengths between 1000 bp and 2000 bp, which are more informative from a taxonomic point of view, because they include both preserved and hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene. In addition, sequences will be filtered on a minimum average read quality score of 9, according to the recommendations from {% cite Nygaard2020 %}. This stage will be carried out through the use of {% tool [fastp](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/fastp/fastp/0.20.1+galaxy0) %} ({% cite Chen_2018 %}), an open-source tool designed to process FASTQ files.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Filter sequence with fastp
>
> 1. {% tool [fastp](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/fastp/fastp/0.20.1+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Single-end or paired reads"*: `Single-end`
     - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `soil collection trimmed`
>        - In *"Adapter Trimming Options"*:
>            - *"Disable adapter trimming"*: `Yes`
>    - In *"Filter Options"*:
>        - In *"Quality filtering options"*:
>            - *"Qualified quality phred"*: `9`
>        - In *"Length filtering options"*:
>            - *"Length required"*: `1000`
>            - *"Maximum length"*: `2000`
>    - In *"Read Modification Options"*:
>        - *"PolyG tail trimming"*: `Disable polyG tail trimming`
>
> 2. Rename the output as `soil collection processed`
>
>
{: .hands_on}

# Re-evaluate datasets quality

> After processing the sequences, we are going to analyze them again using __FastQC__ and __MultiQC__ to see if we have managed to correct the anomalies that we had detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After processing the sequences, we are going to analyze them again using {% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %} and {% tool [MultiQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multiqc/multiqc/1.8+galaxy1) %} to see if we have managed to correct the anomalies that we had detected.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Quality check
>
> 1. {% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `soil collection processed` 
>
> 4. Rename the outputs as `FastQC processed: Raw` and `FastQC processed: Web` 
> 3. {% tool [MultiQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multiqc/multiqc/1.8+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - In *"Results"*:
>      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `FastQC`
>      - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*:
>
>		- `FastQC processed: Raw`
> 4. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the generated HTML file
> 
>
{: .hands_on}

> We can verify that after processing the samples, the GC content presents a unimodal distribution, which indicates that the anomalies in the sequences have been successfully eliminated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can verify that after processing the samples, the GC content presents a unimodal distribution, which indicates that the anomalies in the sequences have been successfully eliminated (Figure 6).
```

![FasTQC plots GC](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/fasqc_per_sequence_content_plot_clean.png "Per sequence GC content in processed samples")

# Assign taxonomic classifications

One of the key steps in metagenomic data analysis is to identify the taxon to which the individual reads belong. Taxonomic classification tools are based on microbial genome databases to identify the origin of each sequence.

## Taxonomic classification with Kraken2

To perform the taxonomic classification we will use __Kraken2__ ({% cite Wood_2019 %}), a tool that assigns labels by examining the k-mers within a sequence and querying them in a database that uses a compact hash table for algorithm efficiency ({% cite deKoning2020 %}).

> ![Taxonomic classification](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/kmers-kraken.jpg "Kramer2 sequence classification algorithm ({% cite Wood2014 %})")

Reviewer: I would say something about the algorithm if you want to include this figure.

Author: @willemdek11 I included some information about that.

> ![Taxonomic classification](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/kmers-kraken.jpg "Kramer2 sequence classification algoritm ({% cite Wood2014 %})")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Taxonomic classification](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/kmers-kraken.jpg "Kramer2 sequence classification algorithm ({% cite Wood2014 %})")
```

Reviewer 2: what is Kramer2?

> For this tutorial we will use the __SILVA database__ ({% cite Quast2012 %}). It includes over 3.2 million 16S rRNA sequences from the _Bacteria_, _Archaea_ and _Eukaryota_ domains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, we will use the __SILVA database__ ({% cite Quast2012 %}). It includes over 3.2 million 16S rRNA sequences from the _Bacteria_, _Archaea_ and _Eukaryota_ domains.
```

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Task description

Reviewer 2: task...

>
> 1. {% tool [Kraken2](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/kraken2/kraken2/2.0.8_beta+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Single or paired reads"*: `Single`
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `soil collection processed` 
>    - *"Print scientific names instead of just taxids"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Confidence"*: `0.1`
>    - In *"Create Report"*:
>        - *"Print a report with aggregrate counts/clade to file"*: `Yes`
>        - *"Format report output like Kraken 1's kraken-mpa-report"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Select a Kraken2 database"*: `Silva (Created: 2020-06-24T164526Z, kmer-len=35, minimizer-len=31, minimizer-spaces=6)`
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >

> >    > A confidence score of 0.1 means that at least 10% of  kmers should match with de databse.  This value can be reduced if a less restrictive taxonomic assignation is desired. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    > A confidence score of 0.1 means that at least 10% of the k-mers should match entries in the database. This value can be reduced if a less restrictive taxonomic assignation is desired. 
```

>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>

> > What does the term k-mer mean?

Reviewer 2: isn't it too late for this? I have been wondering what a k-mer is for 20 lines or so ;)

> 
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >

> > >  The term k-mer refers to all of a sequence's subsequences of length _k_, such that the sequence GATACA would have six monomers (G,A,T,A,C,A), five 2-mers (GA,AT,TA,AC,CA), four 3-mers (GAT,ATA,TAC,ACA), three 4-mer (GATA,ATAC,TACA) and two 5-mer (GATAC,ATACA).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >  The term k-mer refers to all the sequence's subsequences of length _k_. For example, the sequence `GATACA` would have six monomers (`G`,`A`,`T`,`A`,`C`,`A`), five 2-mers (`GA`,`AT`,`TA`,`AC`,`CA`), four 3-mers (`GAT`,`ATA`,`TAC`,`ACA`), three 4-mer (`GATA`,`ATAC`,`TACA`) and two 5-mer (`GATAC`,`ATACA`).
```

> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

# Analyze taxonomic assigment

> Once we have assigned the corresponding taxa to each sequence, the next step is to properly visualize the data, for which we will use the __Krona__ tool ({% cite Ondov_2011 %}). But before that, we need to adjust the format of the data output from __Kraken2__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have assigned the corresponding taxa to each sequence, the next step is to properly visualize the data, for which we will use the {% tool [Krona pie chart](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/crs4/taxonomy_krona_chart/taxonomy_krona_chart/2.7.1) %} tool ({% cite Ondov_2011 %}). But before that, we need to adjust the format of the data output from {% tool [Kraken2](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/kraken2/kraken2/2.0.8_beta+galaxy0) %}.
```

> Once we have assigned the corresponding taxa to each sequence, the next step is to be able to properly visualize the data, for which we will use the __Krona__ tool ({% cite Ondov_2011 %}). Previosuly it is necessary to adjust the format of the data output from __Kraken2__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once we have assigned the corresponding taxa to each sequence, the next step is to properly visualize the data, for which we will use the __Krona__ tool ({% cite Ondov_2011 %}). But before that, we need to adjust the format of the data output from __Kraken2__.
```

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Task description

Reviewer 2: task :)

>
> 1. {% tool [Reverse](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/datamash_reverse/datamash_reverse/1.1.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `Report: Kraken2 on collection`
>
> 2. {% tool [Replace Text](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_line/1.1.2) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `Reverse on collection`
>    - In *"Replacement"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Replacement"*
>            - *"Find pattern"*: `\|`
>            - *"Replace with"*: `\t`
>
> 3. {% tool [Remove beginning](Remove beginning1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `Replace Text on collection`
>
{: .hands_on}

## Visualize the taxonomical classification with Krona

> __Krona__ allows hierarchical data to be explored with zooming, multi-layered pie charts. Through this tool we can easily visualize the composition of the bacterial communities, as well as compare how the populations of microorganisms are modified according to the conditions of the environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__Krona__ allows hierarchical data to be explored with zooming, multi-layered pie charts. With this tool, we can easily visualize the composition of the bacterial communities and compare how the populations of microorganisms are modified according to the conditions of the environment.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Task description
>
> 1. {% tool [Krona pie chart](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/crs4/taxonomy_krona_chart/taxonomy_krona_chart/2.7.1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"What is the type of your input data"*: `Tabular`
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `Remove beginning on collection`
>    - *"Provide a name for the basal rank"*: `Bacteria`
>
{: .hands_on}

Let's take a look at the result. Using the search bar we can check if certain taxa are present.

<iframe id="krona" src="krona_all.html" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="900px"> ![Krona](../../images/metagenomics-nanopore/krona.png) </iframe>

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. What can we say about the health status of the soil samples?

> > 2. Are there significant differences in bacterial population structure between soil samples and rhizosphere samples?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 2. Are there significant differences in the bacterial population structure between soil samples and rhizosphere samples?
```

>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >

> > > 1. The low presence of _Alphaproteobacteria_ (including members of the order _Rhizobiales_), as well as the abundance of _Bacteroidetes_ and _Gammaproteobacteria_, suggest that the soil is highly exposed to phosphorus. This mineral is strongly associated with anthropogenic activity as it is an important component of agrochemicals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > 1. The low presence of _Alphaproteobacteria_ (including members of the order _Rhizobiales_), as well as the abundance of _Bacteroidetes_ and _Gammaproteobacteria_, suggest that the soil is highly exposed to phosphorus. This mineral is strongly associated with the anthropogenic activity as it is an important component of agrochemicals.
```

> > 2. We can observe that there are important differences in the structure of the bacterial populations between the soil and rhizosphere samples. Particularly significant is the increase in phylum _Plactomycetes_, which are usually abundant in the rhizosphere.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

# Conclusion

> {:.no_toc}

Author: Done :)

> In this tutorial we used MinION Nanopore sequencing data to study the health status of soil samples and the structure of bacterial populations. The results indicate that the soil suffers some degree of erosion as a result of their exposure to agrochemicals. We have also been able to study how the composition of microbial communities is modified in presence of plant organisms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we used MinION Nanopore sequencing data to study the health status of soil samples and the structure of bacterial populations. The results indicate that the soil suffers some degree of erosion as a result of their exposure to agrochemicals. We have also been able to study how the composition of microbial communities is modified in presence of plant organisms.
```

{: .hands_on}

# Analyze taxonomic assigment

> Once we have assigned the corresponding taxa to each sequence, the next step is to properly visualize the data, for which we will use the __Krona pie chart__ tool ({% cite Ondov_2011 %}). But before that, we need to adjust the format of the data output from __Kraken2__.

Reviewer 2: why this change?

Author: I consider that to include that information every time makes reading difficult, and in addition, it is not the style of most of the training. This information is included in the hands_on block.
